# Ruby on Rails

## Getting Started

1. Generate a new Rails app.
1. Generate a controller and add an action.
1. Create a route that maps a URL to the controller action.
1. Create a view with HTML and CSS.
1. Run the local web server and preview the app in the browser.

### Generate a new Rails app

1. `rails new MySite` => creates a new Rails app named "MySite" & generated folders
1. `cd MySite` => enter the MySite directory
1. `bundle install` => installs all software packages needed by the Rails app, called gems. Listed in the file `Gemfile`
1. `rails server` => started the Rails dev server so you can preview the app in browser at `http://localhost:4001` (called WEBrick)

#### Request/Response

When you visit `http://localhost:4001` it initiates the **request/response cycle**

- The browser makes a request for the URL `http://localhost:4001`.
- The request hits the Rails router in `config/routes.rb`. The router recognizes the URL and sends the request to the controller.
- The controller receives the request and processes it.
- The controller passes the request to the view.
- The view renders the page as HTML.
- The controller sends the HTML back to the browser for you to see.

### Create a controller

```shell
rails generate controller Pages
```

This command generates a controller called "Pages" in the `app/controllers` directory.

Once it's finished running:

1. Open `app/controllers/pages_controller.rb`
1. Add a method `home` within the class `PagesController`
1. Methods in Rails controllers are also referred to as "controller actions"
   b. So another way to phrase this is that we added a `home` action to the Pages controller

```ruby
class PagesController < ApplicationController

  def home
  end

end
```

There are [seven standard controller actions](https://www.codecademy.com/articles/standard-controller-actions) for doing common operations with data (`index`, `show`, `new`, `create`, `edit`, `update`, and `destroy`)

If a controller looked like this:

```ruby
class MessagesController < ApplicationController
  skip_before_action :verify_authenticity_token
  def index
    @messages = Message.all
  end
end
```

And routes contained this:

```ruby
get 'messages', to 'messages#index'
```

When a user visits `http://localhost:4001/messages`, the routes file maps this request to the Messages controller’s `index` action which retrieves all messages from the database and stores them in the variable `@messages` which is passed on the the view.

### Create a Route

Open `config/routes.rb`

Within the `Rails.application.routes.draw` block:

```ruby
get 'welcome', to: 'pages#home'
```

This makes it so when a user visits `http://localhost:4001/welcome` the router will send the request to the Pages controller's `home` action

Add the following configure a route for when a user visits `http://localhost:4001`

```ruby
root 'pages#home'
```

To map URLs to a controller's seven standard actions (below example for a `Signups` controller)

```ruby
resources :signups
```

In the terminal, you can then run `bundle exec rails routes` to view all of the new URLs that the resource route created.

You can name a route using `as:`

```ruby
get '/tags/:id', to: 'tags#show', as: :tag
```

Rails will then automatically generate a helper method named `<name>_path` (ex: `tag_path`). You can then use that method within an `each` block to generate a URL to the specific entry in db's path.

For example:

```ruby
<% @tags.each do |t| %>
<div class="card col-xs-4">
  <%= image_tag t.image %>
  <h2> <%= t.title %> </h2>
  # generates a URL to a specific tag's path. ex: /tag/1
  <%= link_to "Learn more", tag_path(t) %>
</div>
<% end %>
```

### Create a View

Add html to `app/views/pages/home.html.erb`

Visit `http://localhost:4001/welcome` to view the html in action\

## Saving Data

### How a database fits into the request-response cycle

1. When you type http://localhost:4001/welcome, the browser makes a request for the URL /welcome.
1. The request hits the Rails router.
1. The router maps the URL to a controller action to handle the request.
1. The controller action receives the request, and asks the model to fetch data from the database.
1. The model returns data to the controller action.
1. The controller action passes the data on to the view.
1. The view renders the page as HTML.
1. The controller sends the HTML back to the browser.

[](https://content.codecademy.com/projects/3/request-response-cycle-dynamic.svg)

### Create a model

```shell
rails generate model YourModel
```

Causes Rails to create two files:

1. a model file in `app/models/yourmodel.rb`. The model represents a table in the database.
1. a migration file in `db/migrate/`. Migrations are a way to update the database.

### Migration file

The migration file contains a few things:

1. `change` method: tells Rails what change to make to the database
1. The initial migration file generated by `rails generate model` uses the `create_table` method to create a new table in the database for the model
1. By default, `create_table` includes the line `t.timestamps` which is a Rails command that creates two columns in the model's table called `created_at` and `updated_at`. These are automatically set when an entry to the table is created or updated.
   a. You can add columns to your table inside the `create_table` block using the format of: `<table>.<type> :<name>`

```ruby
class CreateTags < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.0]
  def change
    create_table :tags do |t|
      t.text :content
      t.string :title
      t.string :image
      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Table types:

- text
- string
- references

### Update the database

```shell
bundle exec rake db:migrate
```

- Instructs the bundler to execute (`exec`) a rake task, in this case, `migrate`, on the database (`db`)
- After creating a new model, running this updates the database with the new data model

### Seed the database

```shell
bundle exec rake db:seed
```

Seeds the database with sample data from `db/seeds.rb`

### Add to the database

Using the `new` and `create` actions (two of the [seven standard Rails actions](https://www.codecademy.com/article/standard-controller-actions))

### Verify the database is working

1. With your app running locally, submit new entries to the database.
1. Open a new terminal window & `cd` into your app's folder
1. Start the Rails console by running `rails console`
1. Retrieve all emails in the database by running the query `ModelName.all` (ex: `Signup.all` for the `Signup` model)

### Reset database

If something weird's happening, you can reset the database by running `bundle exec rake db:reset`

## Forms

[](https://content.codecademy.com/projects/3/two-turns-post.svg)

### Turn 1

In the first turn of the request/response cycle, the page with the form is displayed to the user.

1. A user opens his browser, types in a URL, and presses Enter.
1. When the user presses Enter, the browser sends a GET request for that URL.
1. The GET request hits the Rails router (config/routes.rb). The router maps the URL to the correct controller action to handle the request.
1. The action receives the GET request and passes it on to the view.
1. The view renders the page as HTML.
1. The controller sends the HTML back to the browser. The page loads and the user sees the page with the form.

### Turn 2

When a user submits the form, it triggers the second turn of the request/response cycle, where the submitted data is saved into the database.

1. The user fills in the form and submits the form.
1. When the user submits the form, the browser sends a POST request to the Rails app.
1. The POST request hits the Rails router. The router maps the POST request to the correct controller action.
1. The action receives the POST request. The action retrieves the submitted data from the form, and uses the model to store the data into the database.
1. The model completes its task.
1. The controller action passes the request on to the view.
1. The view renders the page as HTML.
1. The controller sends the HTML back to the browser. The page loads and the user sees it.

[source](https://www.codecademy.com/article/request-response-cycle-forms)

## Templating

The default web templating languages in Rails is embedded Ruby or ERB.

`filename.html.erb` files are template files which contain variables and control flow statements.

Templates can be used to loop through and display data from a database, for example.

```ruby
<% @messages.each do |message| %>
  <div class="message">
    <p class="content"><%= message.content %></p>
    <p class="time"><%= message.created_at %></p>
  </div>
<% end %>
```

- `<% @messages.each do |message| %>` iterates through each message in `@messages` array.
  - You create `@messages` in the Messages controller's index action.
- For each message, we use `<%= message.content %>` and `<%= message.created_at %>` to display its content and the time when it was created.

## Associations

You can create multiple models that have associations. For example, if you have two models named `Tag` and `Destination`

- `has_many :destinations` in the `Tag` class denotes that a single Tag can have multiple Destinations
- `belongs_to :tag` in the `Destination` class denotes that each Destination belongs to a single tag

Some other examples of the `has_many`/`belongs_to` pair are:

- a Library has many Books; a Book belongs to a Library
- an Album has many Photos; a Photo belongs to an Album
- a Store has many Products; a Product belongs to a Store

Use the `t.references :<model>` to add a references column to one model's database table that adds a _foreign key_ pointing to another table (Foreign keys are references to rows on other tables).

The route `get '/tags/:id', to: 'tags#show', as: :tag` means:

- When a user visits `http://localhost:4001/tags/1` the route will send the request to the Tags controller's show action with `{id: 1}` in `params`
- The `@destinations = @tag.destinations` in the show action retrieves all the destinations that belong to the tag and stores them in `@destinations`
  - the `has_many`/`belongs_to` association lets us query for destinations like this
- The tag and its destinations are sent to the view to be displayed

Below code uses `params` to find a destination by `id` and save it to `@destination`

```ruby
def show
  @destination = Destination.find(params[:id])
end
```

Let's say you have a Review model & a Book model, and the Review migration create_table has a `t.references :book` column. If you want to look up all the Reviews for a given Book in your database in the rails console:

```rails
Review.find_by!(book_id: <id>)
```

Ex: `Review.find_by!(book_id: 1)`
